---
layout: default
permalink: /introduction
title: Introduction
---
# Yrth
Yrth is a world of knights and dragons, forests full of fey creatures, and deep caverns where Dwarves and Goblins fight
endless wars over piles of gold. Wizards command elemental powers while cities are homes to temples and rogues alike.

At least that's what it was a couple thousand years ago.

Feudalism was gradually replaced by more centralized goverments. Increase in agricultural yield led to surplus
labor available for small-scale manufacturing. Water power had supplemented animal power, but the development
of steam power had the advantage of not being tied to a water source. Coal-powered steam engines were supplanted
by engines that burned derivatives of a black oily substance pumped up from deep underground. Sages learned how to
harness electricity and use it to power devices. Over a few centuries the world had changed from horses and carts to
machines that people piloted over a network of smooth roads at speeds not previously imagined, and even metal tubes with
wings that transported people through the skies and could reach the other side of the planet in hours. Dwarven caverns
were no longer lit by fires, but had electric lights powered by reactors that harnessed the power of the very atom.
People carried devices in their pockets that allowed them to communicate almost instantaneously with the other side of
the world and access information in ways that a few centuries earlier would have been the envy of the world's greatest
sages.

All this came at a cost, however. The fertility of the land was used faster than it was replaced. The burning of coal
and oil had an effect on air quality. Wars over limited resources were nothing new, but the scale was. Weapons now
existed that could level a city from a continent away. Those who had power and wealth could consolidate it, and the gap
between those with power and those without was an order of magnitude greater than it ever had been between a noble and
a serf. The weather patterns were becoming increasingly unstable and coastal cities were in danger of being flooded as
polar regions warmed.

It was the Elves who started leaving first. They had been largely uninterested in industrialization until it started
becoming a problem for them. Between deforestation and pollution, they were finding Yrth to be less and less hospitable.
When humans were just staring powered flight, Elves started crafting their first interstellar ship. Shortly after humans
had managed to set foot on the nearest planet, the Eälótë, in the shape of a swan in flight, took to the skies and left
atmosphere on its way to the closest neighboring star. While other species constructed ships from metal and plastic,
the Elves grew theirs from the forest. The shipwrights sang to the trees as they grew and nurtured them into a material
that could shelter the crew from the cold, vacuum, and radiation of space. The ships' systems were all organic, with
communication between them more closely resembling a nervous system than a computer network. Other ships soon followed,
all shaped like birds or sea creatures. Human discussions of interstellar travel involved either some form of
faster-than-light (FTL) travel or sleeper ships, with the transit time between stars expected to be decades at the least.
Elves had no need of sleeper ships, as a transit time of centuries was not a problem for them.

The FTL breakthrough came not from science, but from magic. Theoretical physicists suggested the Singularity Gradient
Hypothesis, which imagines the four dimensions of space and time as the surface of an expanding five-dimensional sphere
(there are various versions involving more dimensions, but the inside of the sphere is another dimension in addition to
the number that make up reality). Movement along the fifth dimension toward the center of the sphere would allow faster
travel relative to real space as the same arc would be shorter. With no means to verify the hypothesis, it remained
largely a curiosity that most people had never heard of, until a human wizard named Kaelen Vayne set out to prove it.
Using a ship constructed with legacy technology that would not suffer too much from magical disruption, he inscribed
glyphs on the ship that assisted him in moving it perpendicular to reality. The blank space that it shifted into was
later termed the _Astral Plane_, though it had no real connection with the process of astral projection. After initial
experiments moving into and out of the astral plane, the Event Horizon's maiden voyage to it to the outskirts of the
solar system in less than an hour.

It was many years before interstellar travel became practical. Some early ships were stranded and lost when their
systems were disabled by the use of magic to move them into and out of the astral plane. Safe and practical FTL travel
became a reality when Dwarven engineers developed the star drive: an arcanotechnological device that was able to manage
astral drops in a controlled and predictable way. Now FTL travel is commonplace and considered safe.

# The Galaxy
Space travel is now commonplace, but establishment of extrasolar colonies when more slowly than many had hoped. Though
many exoplanets were found within the habitable zones of their stars, none were found that could already support life.
Bases were built under biodomes, but none of them were fully self-sustaining there was a lot of public resistance to
using Yrth's dwindling resources to support extrasolar bases that provided no direct benefit to Yrth's population. Some
terraforming efforts showed early promise, but most eventually failed due to the difficulty in establishing biomes with
sufficient diversity to thrive.

Once again the answer came from a cooperation between science and magic. Terraforming engineers were supplemented by
terramancers. Together they were able to establish biomes much faster and solve a wider range of problems. The peoples
of Yrth have spread outward several hundred light years in all directions. But except for some evidence of microbial
life (most of which is disputed), no signs have been found of life outside Yrth.

While some explored the stars, the situation back home reached a crisis point. While technological advances had minimized
harm to the ecosystem, the tipping point had long previously been reached. Climates had shifted, rendering formally
temperate regions frigid and turned fertile cropland into deserts. coastal regions were underwater. People across the
globe were uprooted from their homes due to inhospitable climate, severe storms, and wars for what resources remained.
Power was held by fewer and fewer people until finally one person established dominion over the world. Claiming divine
status, he is said to be immortal and has his own priesthood. Direct reference to the emperor is taboo, and is referred
to through circumlocution as The Eternal Throne.

Settled worlds within a few hundred light years of Yrth are part of the Yrth Empire. Though dominated by humans, dwarves
worked in cooperation with humans in exploration and settlement, and most are content within the Empire. Elves seldom
interact with outsiders, equally at home on worlds that they have settled or aboard their Lifeships among the stars.
With lifespans spanning millennia, they have never seen a need to develop FTL travel, and their terraforming techniques
take centuries but achieve above average results. Their worlds are all located within the empire, not far from Yrth, and
are thought to number no more than a half dozen or so. Gnomes also keep to themselves and are at home either aboard ship
or in biodomes built on worlds with hostile environments. They have had an easier time than other peoples moving into
space because for some reason that is not entirely understood, gnome magic does not interfere with advanced technology.
In the Borderlands at the edge of the Yrth Empire you can find a number of smaller independent factions, along with
pirates, smugglers, outcasts, and orkish scavengers.

# Haven
Haven is a pirate base in the Borderlands, just beyond the outer edge of the Yrth Empire. It consists of a series of
biodomes on a lifeless world with no atmosphere in the Silma system. The base is administered by a council made up of
the major pirate crews that call Haven home. While it started as a pirate base, Haven has attracted a population of
outcasts and refugees who call it home. While you will not find all the comforts of an inner world there, it has enough
for its residents to live comfortably, with a variety of merchants and services, not least notable of which is the number
of taverns, breweries, and distilleries. It is large enough that no resident knows all its secrets, but still small
enough to avoid the attention of the Yrth Navy.